Organizational models often evolve organically,
as people throughout the business independently
identify and pursue solutions based in data science.
The first step in many organizations' journey towards data-driven practice
then is the evolution of a completely decentralized data science organization.
In such an organization,
functional areas and business units independently
define and manage their data and data science initiatives.
The organization therefore has
no overall data strategy and there is
very little alignment or coordination across different areas of the business.
At the other extreme,
a completely centralized model, like a government,
manages all data and data science related projects
centrally through a group that typically includes a chief data officer.
This tends to be highly controlled and highly prescriptive with coordination
of all activities supported through central human capital and infrastructure management.
These two organizational models,
completely decentralized and completely centralized,
tend to reflect the early stages of
organizational data science models as organizations evolve in their data science journey.
At some point along this journey,
businesses often find that some combination of central management and
decentralized execution work best to manage data science in their organization.
This combination of decentralized and centralized management is known as federation.
A federated functional model, for example,
gives individual functional areas the responsibility for
maintaining data assets and executing data science initiatives,
but leverages a chief data officer and
possibly a central data science function as
a facilitator and strategic leader of those initiatives.
Likewise, a federated BU based model also leverages centralized facilitation,
but gives individual business units
the responsibility for data assets and data science execution.
A more central federated model includes
greater strategic and operational responsibility
with the chief data officer's organization,
with business units or functional areas managing data assets and
data science initiatives under
the strong guidance of that centralized data science organization.